Yesterday I was pondering the impact that hope, determination, persistence and sheer will have on success – be it personal or commercial.  Steve Jobs is infamously cited as the example of success derived from an ability to deny reality.  That fact that Mr. Job’s departure from rationale thought created an entirely new definition of reality is a paradox.  There is no denying that Apple has completely rocked our world and been the major catalyst for competitive innovation.  Clearly we all benefited from Steve Job’s altered sense of what was real and possible.
But there is another kind of irrational thought that can be lethal in business: Refusing to accept or acknowledge that innovative market entrants are competitive threats. To me, that pretty much characterizes VeriFone’s chief executive Doug Bergeron thinking when he likened Square to “Pets.com.”  Again I say: Are you kidding me?  Surely Mr. Bergeron cannot be serious?  I share Mr. Bergeron’s perspective on how irrational exuberance propelled the dot.com era and bust.  But to deny Square’s competitive influence and market disruptive products is denying reality in a manner detrimental to Verifone.  I believe that hyper vigilance to market changes and the influence of new competitive threats is a key CEO job requirement.  Human nature may cause historically successful CEO’s to bristle at comparisons to upstarts or dislike the fact that a competitor is rewriting your competitive landscape, but denial of the brutal facts is essentially allowing one’s ego to blind rationale thinking.  Denying the truth doesn’t make it go away, instead it can be a tell-tale sign of flawed leadership and an omen for the future.
My intention is not to be overly harsh or critical of Mr. Bergeron. Being the CEO of any company is difficult; an additional layer of stress is added if the CEO is leading a publically traded company.  And if your company is part of the financial services industry, it can be downright terrifying given the speed of technological innovation, endless regulatory changes, economic uncertainty and competitive upstarts threatening your market position and very existence.  But clinging to the status quo is not a particularly winning strategy and compliancy is especially lethal when there are so many irrationally exuberant upstarts seeking to dethrone the status quo.  Granted, most won’t see the IPO light of day, but some who with creative solutions to real problems; possess determination, flexibility and belief in their idea that supersedes reality, will succeed.
What we resist persists.

Square is close to raising $200 million, according to reports, for an implied valuation of $3.25 billion — nearly as much as its well-entrenched point of sale competitor VeriFone, which is currently worth about $3.7 billion.  Square has been battling competitors for the past several years and has successfully created a business out of providing card acceptance for casual users.
When asked about the news and speculation that Square could rival VeriFone’s size with only about a tenth of the sales, and no real profits, VeriFone chief executive Doug Bergeron responded with two words: “Pets.com” — referring to the over-hyped dot-com that crashed and burned in 2000. (A Square spokesman declined to comment.)
Other industry observers are more open-minded. “It’s very impressive that they are raising money at this kind of valuation,” says Wedbush analyst Gil B. Luria. “That they are raising money at this kind of valuation, that they are now [almost] as valuable as VeriFone… It’s a testament to the fact that Square has not only been a tech innovator, but a business innovator. They are the ones that uncovered that there is a lot of untapped demand.”
The New York Times‘ DealBook broke the news. The financing round will be led Rizvi Traverse Management head Suhail Rizvi, according to DealBook. But while the investment could help Square better compete with the likes of Google, Intuit, PayPal, and, of course, San Jose terminal maker VeriFone — all of which have launched mobile payment dongles of their own — Square could actually pose a greater threat to the card associations.” Granted, the direction they’re espousing may end up being more disruptive to MasterCard and Visa in the future,” says Ron Shevlin, a senior analyst at Aite Group, in an email. “But given the future potential for mobile payments (both from a retail and P2P perspective), I can easily see why an investor would want to put $200 million in Square.”
“Indeed, bankers never saw Square coming and in the past underestimated the now three-year-old company,” says James Van Dyke, the president and founder of Javelin Strategy and Research. “At NACHA Payments a couple of years ago, many veterans were dismissing the threat represented by this money-movement interloper, yet Jack [Dorsey] and Jim [McKelvey] realize that payments is all about networking technology and social interaction,” he says. “What I’m watching for are signs that Square could plan to strengthen their role in enabling merchant acceptance and then use that as a springboard for payments issuance, to compete with the likes of other Silicon Valley companies.”